Add federated services docs (#1874)
linkerd/website: linkerd.io/content/2-edge/tasks/federated-services.md

---

> title: Multi-Cluster Federated Services

Reviewer: We haven't always stuck to this so it is currently inconsistent, but could you please make this a present participle phrase, e.g. "Using multi-cluster federated services" or "Federating your services" or something like that.

description: Using multi-cluster federated services
---

Linkerd's [multicluster extension](../multicluster/) can create federated
services which act as a union of multiple services in different clusters with
the same name and namespace. By sending traffic to the federated service, that
traffic will be load balanced among all endpoints of that service in all linked

> clusters. The allows the client to be cluster agnostic, balance traffic across

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
clusters. This allows the client to be cluster agnostic, balance traffic across
```

multiple clusters, and be resiliant to the failure of any individual cluster.

> Federated services send traffic directly to the pods of the member services and
> not through a gateway. Therefore, federated services have the same requirements

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Federated services send traffic directly to the pods of the member services
rather than using a gateway. Therefore, federated services have the same requirements
```

  cluster must be able to address and connect to pods in the other cluster.
* The clusters must have the same trust root.
* Any clients connecting to the federated service must be meshed.

This guide will walk you through creating a federated service to load balance
traffic to a service which exists in multiple clusters. A federated service can
include services from any number of clusters, but in this guide we'll create
a federated service for a service that spans 3 clusters.

## Prerequisites

* Three clusters. We will refer to them as `west`, `east`, and `north` in this
  guide.
* The clusters must be on a *flat network*. In other words, pods from one
  cluster must be able to address and connect to pods in the other cluster.
* Each of these clusters should be configured as `kubectl`
  [contexts](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/configure-access-multiple-clusters/).
  We'd recommend you use the names `west`, `east`, and `north` so that you can
  follow along with this guide. It is easy to
  [rename contexts](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubectl/kubectl-commands#-em-rename-context-em-)

>   with `kubectl`, so don't feel like you need to keep it all named this way

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  with `kubectl`, so don't feel like you need to keep them all named this way
```

  forever.

## Step 1: Installing Linkerd and Linkerd-Viz

First, install Linkerd and Linkerd-Viz into all three clusters, as described in
the [multicluster guide](../multicluster/#install-linkerd-and-linkerd-viz).
Make sure to take care that all clusters share a common trust anchor.

## Step 2: Installing Linkerd-Multicluster

We will install the multicluster extension into all three clusters. We can
install without the gateway because federated services use direct pod-to-pod
communication.

```console
> linkerd --context west multicluster install --gateway=false | kubectl --context west apply -f -
> linkerd --context west check

> linkerd --context east multicluster install --gateway=false | kubectl --context east apply -f -
> linkerd --context east check

> linkerd --context north multicluster install --gateway=false | kubectl --context north apply -f -
> linkerd --context north check
```

## Step 3: Linking the Clusters

> We use the `linkerd multilcuster link` command to link the `east` and `north`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We use the `linkerd multicluster link` command to link the `east` and `north`
```

[
  {
    "conditions": [
      {
        "lastTransitionTime": "2024-11-07T19:53:01Z",
        "localRef": {
          "group": "",
          "kind": "Service",
          "name": "bb-federated",
          "namespace": "mc-demo"
        },
        "message": "",
        "reason": "Mirrored",
        "status": "True",
        "type": "Mirrored"
      }
    ],
    "controllerName": "linkerd.io/service-mirror",
    "remoteRef": {
      "group": "",
      "kind": "Service",
      "name": "bb",
      "namespace": "mc-demo"
    }
  }
]
> kubectl --context west -n linkerd-multicluster get link/north -ojsonpath='{.status.federatedService
s}' | jq .
[
  {
    "conditions": [
      {
        "lastTransitionTime": "2024-11-07T19:53:06Z",
        "localRef": {
          "group": "",
          "kind": "Service",
          "name": "bb-federated",
          "namespace": "mc-demo"
        },
        "message": "",
        "reason": "Mirrored",
        "status": "True",
        "type": "Mirrored"
      }
    ],
    "controllerName": "linkerd.io/service-mirror",
    "remoteRef": {
      "group": "",
      "kind": "Service",
      "name": "bb",
      "namespace": "mc-demo"
    }
  }
]
```

> ## Step 5: Send some traffic!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Step 6: Send some traffic!
```

We'll create a deployment that uses `curl` to generate traffic to the
`bb-federated` service.

```bash
> cat <<EOF | linkerd --context west inject - | kubectl --context west apply -f -
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: traffic
  namespace: mc-demo
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: traffic
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: traffic
    spec:
      containers:
      - args:
        - -c
        - |
          while true
          do curl -s http://bb-federated:8080
          echo
          sleep 1
          done
        command:
        - /bin/sh

>         image: appropriate/curl

Reviewer 2: I assume this was a placeholder?
```suggestion
        image: curlimages/curl
```

Author: nope, https://github.com/appropriate/docker-curl

Reviewer 4: FWIW, It would be better to point at an actively maintained image: https://hub.docker.com/r/curlimages/curl

Reviewer 3: I tend to agree with Oliver htere -- `appropriate/docker-curl`'s last change was almost before Kubernetes. 🙂
